## Chronodes: Interactive Multifocus Exploration of Event Sequences
### ABSTRACT
We present Chronodes, an interactive system that unifies data mining and human-centric visualization techniques to support explorative analysis of longitudinal mHealth data. Chron- odes extracts and visualizes frequent event sequences that reveal chronological patterns across multiple par- ticipant timelines of mHealth data. It then combines novel interaction and visualization techniques to enable multifocus event sequence analysis, which allows health researchers to interactively define, explore, and compare groups of participant behaviors using event sequence combinations.

### INTRODUCTION
#### Our Contributions
* mHealth data introduces unique challenges that existing tools for analyzing EHRs do not adequately address. Chronodes is one of the first attempts to explore how to best represent and explore mHealth data, combining data mining and human-centric visualization tech- niques to aid data exploration, pattern discovery, and fine-grain analysis of longitudinal mHealth records.
* Chronodes introduces two novel capabilities that help health researchers interactively explore and combine sequences to ask important, complex questions such as “what happens between first lapses that precede high activity, and second lapses that follow low activity but high stress?” 
* We conducted an informal study with 20 expert researchers from a spectrum of mHealth
related disciplines. By summarizing the insights gained, we outline important open re- search and design challenges in developing the mHealth field, and offer recommendations and design guidelines for future research.

### RELATED WORK
#### Visualization of Multiple Timelines
For EHRs and mobile health data, aggregating the event data of multiple patient timelines into a single timeline can be difficult to make sense of—the order of events from one timeline to another is completely uncorrelated. This challenge is customary in healthcare analysis: apart from needing to understand the relationships between a patient’s various physiological records, analysts must do the same between thousands of patients on end [3]. Principally, Aigner et al. [1] and Brehmer et al. [6] provide a series of typologies and guidelines for visualizing timeline data according to a variety of data types and representational criteria. Meanwhile, approaches to “multifocus” timeline visualization [38, 42] compliment such techniques by enabling users to select multiple segments of time from timeline visualizations, which can then be displayed in a consolidated format and used to find similar patterns [43]. Fundamentally, visualizing dissimilar records side by side proposed in Fouse et al. [13] enables users to identify high-level correlations between the distinct data streams. However, even these visualization approaches become increasingly intractable as we scale to more patients and sensor kinds, which demands new visual and algorithmic techniques for summarizing the data of multiple, concurrent timelines. Accordingly, in an effort to unify many patient timelines, CareFlow [28] visualizes the outcomes of 50,000 patients in a single, tree-like timeline. Although this approach provides an expressive high-level overview of similar patient groups, it has lim- ited support for the specification of behavioral groups and repetitive event sequences. Whereas Chronodes also provides a summary of participant data in this fashion (Figure 1A), its func- tional concentration is a new sequence-based overview that reveals repeating event patterns at a glance.
#### Event Alignment
Tools such as EventFlow [24] and LifeFlow [39], as well as others in non–health-related fields such as Experiscope [17], allow users to select a specific event (e.g., drug A prescribed), thereby displaying the events that occur both before and after the selected event, for all data records. This technique of “event alignment” is useful for extrapolating event causation and chronological trends, and also for organizing event flows around a consistent visual reference point.
Still, even with alignment, the abundance of data presented by these interfaces, especially for large datasets, is complex and difficult to understand at a glance. To mitigate this visual over- load, existing tools rely on techniques of simplification, such as Find-and-Replace [24], which can compress multiple user-specified events into one. Although this kind of simplification reduces the number of visual elements on the screen, it hides information as the user is repeatedly working toward an increasingly simplistic representation—it is difficult to recover how the simplified data stream represents the original data [24]. With an interactive strategy similar to event alignment, Chronodes reveals event-based patterns from aggregated data streams without the visual com- plexity of presenting mHealth data records as is. Then, as opposed to iteratively consolidating events to simplify the visualization of all participant records, Chronodes leverages the properties of frequent event sequences to depict patterns of behaviors that can be constructed and explored interactively.
#### Cohort Analysis
An alternate approach to understanding the trends of aggregated mHealth data streams is to con- sider groups of patients as cohorts, or individuals that share certain properties [4, 23]. In an effort to comparatively assess sequences of events between cohorts, projects such as CoCo (Cohort Com- parison) [23] show the chronology of events associated with two user-defined cohorts. Whereas this effectively reveals the different properties and event sequences between specified cohorts, CoCo focuses on specifying and comparing the attributes of two distinctly defined cohorts (e.g., male and female), and does not enable the user to interactively and dynamically redefine cohort groups by arranging sequences of events. Chronodes builds on the cohort comparison methodol- ogy by allowing the user to define cohorts constructively: rather than specifying cohorts for com- parison and viewing their sequences of events, Chronodes allows cohorts to be specified by an arrangement of the events themselves. By pairing this functionality with event alignment, Chron- odes enables the user to fluidly explore cohorts and their associated chains of events in tandem.
#### Sequence Mining and Pattern Matching
Building machine learning and pattern matching algorithms into interactive visualizations presents promising opportunities for enhancing human pattern-finding abilities. Hochheiser and Shneiderman [18] and Buono et al. [7] demonstrated how users could select specific patterns in quantitative data streams and see where else they were found. For event-based data, Fails et al. [12] developed a query system to find patterns across multiple event histories. Gschwandtner et al. [16] provide users with more options to specify how these patterns are defined and lends detailed rep- resentations of how patterns compare.
Acknowledging the potential of frequent sequence mining in dense event-based data, Click- stream [22] mines frequent sequences of events and visualizes them in clusters according to their similarity. In a more consolidated visual format, ActiviTree [37] renders frequent event patterns found throughout participant data as a visual tree of “common” event sequences. Frequence [29] and Scribe Radar [40] bridge this technique with CareFlow’s [28] representation of events and con- necting edges, and then enable specification of cohorts by selecting sequential branches. Allowing users to extend events sequences as they are retrieved, Progressive Insights [36] offers an alter- nate, constructive methodology to specifying event sequences. Whereas TimeStitch [31] designed new interactive paradigms for specifying and manipulating event sequences in a constructive, nonlinear fashion, Coquito [21] enabled the same constructive definition of behavioral groups for cohorts. Both TimeStitch and Coquito implement kinds of visual query languages, as in Zgraggen et al. [41], that enable the interactive definition of queries on event-based data. Chronodes builds on this foundation of work with a constructive event-based querying system, enabling the explo- ration and discovery of frequent patterns across multiple continuous timelines of mHealth records.


https://www.cc.gatech.edu/~dchau/papers/17-tiis-chronodes.pdf
