## Understanding variations in pediatric asthma care processes in the emergency department using visual analytics 
Rahul C. Basole1,2, Mark L. Braunstein1,2, Vikas Kumar2,3, Hyunwoo Park2,4,
Minsuk Kahng3, Duen Horng (Polo) Chau3, Acar Tamersoy3, Daniel A. Hirsh5,6, Nicoleta Serban4, James Bost5, Burton Lesnick5, Beth L. Schissel5,6, Michael Thompson5

### Abstract
* key - We designed and developed an in- teractive visual analytic process exploration and discovery tool and used it to explore clinical data from 5784 pediatric asthma emergency department patients. 

### Introduction
* Gap - refining process is developed in many other fields but not healthcare
* Motivation - we have records and data
* Goal - designing and developing an interactive visual analytic process exploration and discovery tool for understanding the state of pediatric asthma emergency department (ED) care. 
* Process - data preprocessing and analysis, design, implementation, and evaluation

### Method
#### Data

#### Design Requirements

We obtained de-identified ED clinical records of 5784 children seen for a primary diagnosis of asthma from January 2013 to January 2014 through Population Discovery, Children’s state- of-the-art data warehouse. This included patient and provider information, administrative events, clinical observations, medi- cations, laboratory tests, and charges in a relational database format (see Supplementary Figure S1). A nurse assigns enter- ing ED patients a clinical severity score of 1 (low) to 5 (high) using a modified version of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI) system.19 A nurse or respiratory therapist often also assigns a locally modified clinical respiratory score (CRS) consisting of six elements with two possible points per element and a maximum score of 12.20 Patients are grouped into CRS ranges of 0–2, 3–5, 6–8, 􏰀9 for selecting an appropriate clinical pathway. As CRS are not yet routinely obtained, our sample reduced to 1496 patients with at least two CRS, one assessed early, the other late in their ED visit. This allowed us to compute a change in CRS (DCRS), providing a numeric, but somewhat subjective, outcome surrogate. Table 1 provides several patient summaries.
We used custom MATLAB code to convert date and time- stamped event data into a graph-based “activity log” (see Supplementary Algorithm 1). Nodes represent activities; a di- rected edge between nodes denotes a patient-traversed activity dyad (a “careflow”). Edges are weighted by their frequency. Edge direction is visually encoded using small arrows as well as clockwise edge direction.
Design Requirements
Based on discussions with practitioners, and Shneiderman’s vi- sual information seeking mantra, we selected an overview-first followed by zoom and filter, and details on demand interaction paradigm,21 an approach recognized as an effective means to deal with scale and complexity.22
To facilitate differentiation between event characteristics and rapid analysis we used both spatial layout and size and color encodings to represent different care process elements. We considered several different layouts (including circle, force- directed), but, based on user feedback and importance in usability, utility, and aesthetics, decided to use a semantic sub- strate design approach.23 We grouped nodes into nonoverlap- ping vertically arranged regions and then sequentially ordered nodes within each region horizontally.
We grouped nodes into nonoverlapping vertically arranged re- gions and then sequentially ordered nodes within each region horizontally. Within each substrate, horizontal node position rep- resents the sequence or magnitude of activities. In the “CRS” substrate, for instance, we position nodes according to the nu- merical score, in increasing order from left to right. In the other substrates, we position nodes based on the sequence of events. In the “Administrative” substrate, for instance, nodes are equally spaced representing the semantic sequence of events. In the “Lab Results” and “Medications” substrates, the horizontal node position is determined by in-degrees from and out-degrees toward other substrates. If a node has many incoming flows from other types of activities, it is positioned further to the left. If one has many outgoing flows to other types of activities, it is po- sitioned further to the right. We did these adjustments for visual clarity and reduction of edge overlaps. Layout algorithm details are provided in the Supplementary Appendix.
Since users prefer to rapidly explore and compare care pro- cesses, we created a simple, point-and-click interface. Our tool is organized into the three regions. The slide-in left panel filter section contains logically organized dynamic filters for rapid ex- ploration of the data.24 The visualization panel provides care process visualizations and layout manipulation, edge and label visibility, and zooming controls. The slide-in bottom panel pro- vides summarized information on visualization-associated out- come measures with details on demand.
