## Characterizing Smoking and Drinking Abstinence from Social Media
### ABSTRACT
* GAP - the lack of longitudinal self-reported data on long-term abstinence has challenged addiction research. 
* What is done - 
  * We leverage the activity spanning almost eight years on two prominent communities on Reddit: StopSmoking and StopDrinking.  
  * We use the self-reported “badge” information of nearly a thousand users as gold standard information on their abstinence status to characterize long-term abstinence. 
  * We build supervised learning based statistical models that use the linguistic features of the content shared by the users as well as the network structure of their social interactions. 
* Results - 
  * Our findings indicate that long-term abstinence from smoking or drinking (∼one year) can be distinguished from short-term abstinence (∼40 days) with 85% accuracy. 
  * We further show that language and interaction on social media offer powerful cues towards characterizing these addiction- related health outcomes. 
* Goal and Further study -
  * We discuss the implications of our find- ings in social media and health research, and in the role of social media as a platform for positive behavior change and therapy.

### INTRODUCTION
main contribution
* We collect and study a novel dataset from Reddit that describes 1,153 users’ self-reported information on their duration of smoking or drinking abstinence via the badges. We use the badge information to identify short-term and long-term abstainers.
* We formulate and identify the key linguistic and interaction characteristics of short-term and long-term abstainers based on activity spanning eight years, from 2006 to 2014.
* We build a supervised learning framework based on the characteristics above to distinguish long-term abstinence from short- term abstinence with over 85% accuracy, 88% precision, and 82% recall.
* Our findings present a number of significant discoveries that may help researchers better understand the role of social media language and interactions in assessing and determining tobacco or alcohol use. We find that:
  * the nature of affect manifested in Reddit posts and comments as well as the tenure of participation in Reddit communities are indicative of short-term or long-term abstinence;
  * the network properties of the users (e.g., indegree) based on their interaction patterns also bear significant explanatory power towards characterizing these addiction-related health outcomes.

### BACKGROUND AND PRIOR WORK
#### Behavioral Science and Addiction
#### Social Media, Health, and Addiction

### DATA
#### Data Collection
#### Ground Truth Creation
* To identify the suitable durations to qualify for short-term or long-term abstinence, 
  The CDFs show stable patterns before the 30 percentile and after the 70 percentile. The 30 percentile mark for SS is 43 days while it is 44 days for SD; the 70 percentile mark is 350 days and 333 days for SS and SD, respectively. 

### STATISTICAL METHOD
We now present the statistical method we employ to characterize long-term abstinence from tobacco or alcohol. For this goal, we introduce the variables outlined below and summarized in Table 2. Response variable. Our binary response variable represents if a user is a short-term or a long-term abstainer of smoking/drinking.
Explanatory variables (Language). Our first set of explanatory variables focuses on extracting linguistic attributes from a user’s posts and comments in SS/SD. Here, we converted the textual con- tent of all the posts and comments in SS/SD to lowercase and ex- tracted the top-100 most frequent unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams (three sets of 100 items each) following the conventional bag-of- words model.7 These 300 n-grams do not include any phrase that is solely comprised of stopwords. We introduce a count variable for each n-gram, representing the total number of times that the corresponding n-gram appears in the user’s posts or comments.
As another dimension of language, we also consider the senti- ment of the posts and comments with VADER [21]. VADER is a lexicon and rule-based sentiment analysis tool that is tailored to specifically detect sentiment expressed in social media. Using VADER, we introduce four variables that correspond to the mean and median of the positive sentiment (PA) and negative sentiment (NA) scores of a user’s posts and comments in SS/SD. Together, this set of explanatory variables contains 304 variables and we re- fer to them as the language variables.
Explanatory variables (Addiction). Our second set of explana- tory variables focuses on the content (posts or comments) shared by a user in subreddits other than SS/SD (we henceforth refer to this set of subreddits as OSR).8 To examine if smoking or drinking related content in OSR could potentially help characterize long- term abstinence, we complied two addiction-related lexicons for smoking and drinking based on words in Urban Dictionary9. Ur- ban Dictionary is a suitable choice due to the informal nature of online language. Specifically, we utilized a snowball approach in which we seeded the dictionary searches with “smok*” and “alco- hol*”. We followed the “related words” returned by the dictionary results on these two seed words. We recursively adopted this ap- proach over three more iterations. The final two lexicons are shown in Table 3. Since a user is unlikely to use every word in the lexi- con, we consider a single count variable that represents the total number of times that any of the words in the lexicon appears in the user’s posts or comments. We also introduce four variables that correspond to the mean and median of the PA and NA scores of the users’ posts and comments in OSR—we again use VADER for this purpose. This set of explanatory variables contains 5 variables and we refer to them as the addiction variables.
Explanatory variables (Interaction). Our third set of explanatory variables focuses on the various aspects of interaction.
(1) Activity measures. We introduce variables for the number of posts and comments in SS/SD and OSR, the mean and median differences in hours (∆) between consecutive contents in SS/SD and OSR, the mean and median content scores in SS/SD and OSR, the mean and median content lengths (in characters) in SS/SD and OSR, and the user’s link and comment karmas. Also, we include variables that represent the number of days since the earliest and latest contents (tenure and recency, respectively) in SS/SD and OSR.
(2) Participation in related subreddits. Since abstainers might seek support from or contribute to other subreddits as well, we also ex- tracted the list of the 100 most widely used subreddits, other than SS and SD themselves, based on the posts and comments of the users. Two researchers familiar with Reddit thereafter individually scanned the list to rate their relevance to our task. Researchers re- ferred to prior addiction literature during this task to identify behav- ioral attributes associated with smoking/alcohol addiction [6]. Sub- reddits with the following characteristics were deemed relevant— emotional discourse subreddits (e.g., r/depression), religious dis- course subreddits (e.g, r/Buddhism and r/atheist), fitness subred- dits (e.g., r/Fitness), and subreddits on other types of addiction and recovery (e.g., r/cripplingalcoholism). Abstainers are known to en- gage to greater emotional expression, including personal and sub- jective topics like religion [30]. Fitness and exercise are also known to be a helpful characteristic of abstinence [6].
The final set of related subreddits considered here are shown in Table 4. For each of these subreddits, we introduce a count variable that represents the total number of posts and comments that the user made in the corresponding subreddit.
(3) Graph measures. To further quantify the interaction between the users in SS/SD, we construct a network based on the users’ posting and commenting patterns in SS/SD. Specifically, if user A comments on user B’s post or comment, we establish a directed edge with a weight of 1 from user A to user B in the network. The total weight of an edge denotes the number of “directed” in- teractions between the corresponding users. We introduce several graph-centric variables, representing a user’s local and global rela- tions with other users in SS/SD: the indegree, outdegree, and de- gree; reciprocity, the number of triangles to which the user par- ticipates (#triangles), and clustering coefficient; the betweenness, closeness and eigenvector centralities; and the number of users in the strongly (SCC) and weakly connected components (WCC) to which the user belongs. Note that for #triangles, clustering coef- ficient and the centrality measures, we consider an undirected net- work in which an edge exists only if it appears in both directions in the original network. We refer the reader to [2] for the details of these measures. This set of explanatory variables contains 48 variables and we refer to them as the interaction variables.
Statistical models. We employ Ridge regression [18] to classify our binary response variable (short-term or long-term smoking/drink- ing abstinence). Most of our explanatory variables correspond to English phrases, which posit the collinearity (i.e., excessive corre- lation between phrases) and sparsity (i.e., some phrases occurring infrequently) properties. Ridge regression guards against problems related to collinearity and sparsity by shifting the weights of the correlated and sparse variables to the more explanatory ones. We use 10-fold cross-validation to determine the best tuning constant that controls the strength of the ridge penalty and also to prevent overfitting to the dataset.
To understand the explanatory powers of our independent vari- ables, we consider three statistical models: (i) the Language model, (ii) the Language + Addiction model, and (iii) the Language + Ad- diction + Interaction model, which consist of (i) the language, (ii) the language and addiction, and (iii) the language, addiction, and interaction variables, respectively. The first two models are moti- vated from prior work [28, 23], and through the third, we examine the additional role of interaction in characterizing abstinence. In these models, we represent each user as feature vectors that are standardized to zero mean and unit variance.

### RESULTS
In this section, we present the results of our two tasks: charac- terizing long-term abstinence from tobacco and from alcohol.
### Deviance Results
To evaluate the goodness of fits of our three models, namely Lan- guage, Language + Addiction, and Language + Addiction + Inter- action, we use deviance. Briefly put, deviance is a measure of the lack of fit to data, hence lower values are better. It is calculated by comparing a model with the saturated model—a model with a theoretically perfect fit, which we consider to be the intercept-only model and refer to as Null. Table 5 provides a summary of the different model fits. Due to the randomness introduced by cross- validation, we ran our models 10 times and here we report the re- sults corresponding to the lowest deviances that we obtained in any of the runs.
Compared to the Null models, we observe that all three of our
models provide considerable explanatory power with significant
improvements in deviances in both SS and SD. The difference be-
tween the deviance of a Null model and the deviances of the other
models approximately follows a χ2 distribution, with degrees of
freedom equal to the number of additional variables in the more
comprehensive model. As an example, comparing the deviance
of Language with that of Null in SS, we see that the informa-
tion provided by the language variables has significant explanatory
power: χ2(304, N = 635) = 880.3 − 438.9 = 441.4, p < 10−6.
This comparison with the Null model is statistically significant af-
ter Bonferroni correction for multiple testing (α = 0.01 since we 3
consider three models). We observe similar deviance results for the Language + Addiction and Language + Addiction + Interaction models in both SS and SD, with the latter models possessing the best fits and highest explanatory powers.
From the fits of the Language + Addiction + Interaction models, Table 6 presents the top-30 positive and top-30 negative β values for the variables corresponding to the n-grams and the top-7 posi- tive and top-7 negative β values for the other variables. The vari- ables with negative and positive β values classify a user as short- term and long-term abstainer, respectively. Note that we standard- ize the feature vectors before regression, hence the β values corre- spond to standardized features. We do not report the statistical sig- nificance of the β values in the form of p-values because they are hard to interpret for strongly biased estimates such as those arise from Ridge regression [15].
The contribution of the different explanatory variables in the two characterization tasks is notable. In both, phrases are notable vari- ables that distinguish short-term and long-term abstinence. In fact, the variables that have the highest explanatory power for short-term abstinence in SS/SD are the phrases “i started” and “in the past”, respectively. We conjecture that the short-term abstainers use these phrases to indicate new intentions: “i started an attempt on mon- day...” and “it feels great to be sober and have my dark drinking days in the past”, respectively. Furthermore, the phrases associated with short-term abstinence are related to current sensation, urge, or confession (“i need to”, “i feel”), and appreciation and acknowl- edgement of support, perhaps because they are newcomers in the community (“thanks for the”, “thank you”). E.g., notice the post excerpt below:
i need to find more friends that don’t drink so much
In contrast, the phrases associated with long-term abstinence are mostly about encouragement and boosting morale (“keep it up”, “hang in there”) and advisory (“worked for me’, “was able to”):
for those of you behind me, keep it up! i believe in you!
Examining some of the non-phrase variables with negative β values, we observe that indegree is a strong indicator of short- term abstinence. This is likely because the short-term abstainers’ contents are typically support-seeking in nature, which attract re- sponses from a variety of users in the SS/SD communities. The negative sentiment of contents is also a significant indicator of short- term abstinence. We conjecture that this is likely due to the ten- dency of the short-term abstainers’ disclosures about recent fail- ures, challenges, and struggles related to quitting. Addiction lit- erature also indicates that increased negative affect and stress are associated with early abstainers of smoking/drinking [35]:
i [...] struggle with depression and used alcohol to escape from my often difficult reality
Focusing on some of the non-phrase variables with positive β values, we observe that tenure in SS/SD and OSR are strong indi- cators of long-term abstinence. Prior work has indicated that long- term social engagement has a positive impact on the psychological states of individuals [8]. Hence, we conjecture that longer tenure on Reddit helps keep individuals intending to abstain from smok- ing/drinking more motivated and focused towards their respective self-improvement goals. Furthermore, users’ comment karma char- acterizes long-term abstinence in SS, suggesting that social en- dorsement obtained from the greater Reddit community in the form of upvotes possibly motivated individuals to succeed in their absti- nence goals.
We also see that the mean content score in SS and the mean positive sentiment of contents in SD are strong indicators of long- term abstinence from smoking and drinking, respectively, which are likely related to the supportive tone expressed in such content. Addiction literature indicates social support to act as a mediator of stress during smoking/drinking urges [35]. E.g., the following excerpt expresses positive sentiment:
#### Classification Results
To evaluate how well our three statistical models distinguish the long-term and short-term abstinence categories, we randomly split the dataset into 90% training and 10% testing partitions. We trained our models only on the training partitions and measured their clas- sification performance on the testing partitions. Due to the ran- domness introduced by cross-validation, we performed the afore- mentioned procedure 10 times to obtain accurate performance es- timates. Assuming that long-term abstinence is our positive class, Table 7 presents the classification results with respect to the F1 score, accuracy, precision, recall, and specificity metrics. We re- port for each metric the mean and standard deviation of the 10 val- ues that we obtained from the 10 iterations on the testing sets.
In general, we observe that the best performing model in both SS and SD is Language + Addiction + Interaction, which achieves the mean F1 scores of 0.86 and 0.85 in SS and SD, respectively. Considering the minimum of the values for SS and SD, this model also achieves a mean accuracy of 0.85, a mean precision of 0.88, a mean recall of 0.82, and a mean specificity of 0.88. This model is followed by Language + Addiction and then Language in terms of performance. Not only the mean values of the performance metrics for Language + Addiction + Interaction are higher than those for the other two models, the ranges of the values are also narrower in Language + Addiction + Interaction (lower standard deviations).
The good performance of Language + Addiction + Interaction is also evident from the receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curves in Figure 4. To obtain the ROC curves, we first sorted the prob- abilities that the users are long-term abstainers as output by the models in ascending order. We then generated 250 threshold points equidistant in the range [0, 1] and applied them on the probabilities of the users in the testing partitions; for each threshold value, all users with probabilities above that value are labeled as long-term abstainers, or short-term abstainers otherwise. This process gener- ated 250 pairs of true positive (TP) rate and false positive (FP) rate values for each testing partition, plotting the average of the 10 TP rate and FP rate values computed using the same threshold value across the 10 experiments on the testing partitions gave us the ROC curves in Figure 4. We observe from the figure that the performance of Language + Addiction + Interaction is superior to the other two models in both SS and SD in the whole spectrum of the average TP rate and FP rate values.

### DISCUSSION
#### Clinical Relevance
Our findings indicate that linguistic and interaction cues gleaned from activity in SS and SD forums may be used to understand short- term or long-term abstinence tendencies among users. Such ability to proactively identify one’s abstinence status may be used to create early warning systems or interventions that are integrated in social platforms. These early warning systems could analyze one’s activ- ity on the platform and engage appropriately if the probability of long-term abstinence drops below a certain level. Certainly, such systems could raise ethical and privacy concerns, and must there- fore be carefully designed and developed. However, if successful, these systems may be used in clinically meaningful ways that pro- vide great benefits. For instance, an individual may more easily keep track of his or her activities and interactions on a social media platform and share them with a therapist, which may subsequently lead to more effective treatment.
Broadly, tracking the patterns of changes in the explanatory vari- ables we identified could help clinicians, medical professionals, and policy makers better understand people’s experiences around long-term abstinence from tobacco or alcohol, and the strategies that may have worked for them. Since, traditionally, it has been challenging to understand and identify factors associated with long- term smoking or drinking abstinence [36], our research can also help identify previously underexplored variables that may contribute towards the success or failure of abstinence.Finally, and importantly, through our statistical models that iden- tify short-term and long-term abstainers, we can begin to determine the abstinence status of those individuals for whom badge or other self-reported information on abstinence is not available. This can be particularly valuable in bringing in-time help and support to in- dividuals who intend to quit smoking or drinking and use a social media platform, however have not adopted the practices of accruing badges, imbibed in the two online communities we study.
#### Implications for Social Media Research
Design Considerations. We believe our findings have strong design- related implications for social media research. Below, we describe several design ideas inspired by our research, which may help tai- lor social media platforms to cater to individuals aiming to abstain from smoking or drinking. Literature indicates that individuals de- sirous of quitting smoking or drinking often go through repetitive phases of cessation and relapse [14]. Hence, new users joining these abstinence communities, or those who have been short-term abstainers may benefit from content on the forum that discusses the challenges and struggles in this early phase. Mechanisms could be created to engage in a conversation with other long-term mem- bers on what to expect during this phase, how to combat desires of smoking or drinking urges, or for general positive reinforcement of their abstinence goal.
Post excerpts containing phrases and other linguistic constructs associated with long-term abstinence may also be promoted to users intending to quit smoking or drinking. They may also be directed to connect with other users in the community who have had suc- cess in tobacco or alcohol abstinence over a period of time—social support and higher levels of social capital have been known to help individuals fight addiction urges [13]. Moderators of these recovery communities may also direct requests for advice or help to appro- priate users in the community who are actively engaged and have had experiences of long-term abstinence. Since we also found that posting activity or commentary in certain other subreddits were associated with long-term abstinence, users may also be recom- mended to participate in those other communities or forums where they might additionally obtain support for beating addiction urges or gather general positive reinforcement of their desire to abstain from smoking or drinking.
In addition, our work showed that network features derived out of the social interaction offered considerable explanatory power. That is, the presence of a strong support network on the forum is likely to play an important role in encouraging long-term ab- stinence. As a design idea, newcomers’ posts could be promoted to prominent positions in the forums’ timelines to attract more atten- tion, increasing their likelihood of receiving responses. In turn, this would broaden engagement of the whole community, decrease user churn, and thereby increase member retention. This could lead to a self-reinforcing positive cycle that attracts and helps increasingly more people.
Furthermore, in these Reddit communities, reputation is associ- ated with “badges” that indicate the duration of abstinence of a user from smoking/drinking. In a way, making such badge information accessible to visitors and users of the forum not only is likely to boost self-esteem because of improved reputation in the commu- nity, but also in general, is likely to induce positive feelings towards abstinence, and encourage and inspire others to do so as well.
Uniqueness of Reddit. We also discuss the effectiveness of ad- diction recovery communities like SS or SD in general. Although many online communities exist to help individuals in addiction re- covery, SS and SD are unique because they encourage long-term abstinence. This is indicated by the fact that almost 50% of the users in our dataset were abstainers for three or more months. We thus believe that participation in these Reddit forums are likely to help individuals adopt a positive attitude and approach towards ad- diction recovery. Moreover, the ability to be anonymous or pseudony- mous can be an additional facilitating element of abstinence—Reddit accounts do not need any personally identifiable information. Users can thus engage in candid and honest discourse, without worrying about the social stigma that often comes with being a victim of addiction. In fact, a considerable fraction (10%) of users in our dataset explicitly only posted on these two subreddits, perhaps in- dicating that either they are on Reddit simply to participate in these abstinence forums, or have alternate account(s) on Reddit for non- addiction recovery related discourse. Also, even though some of the explanatory variables that we consider in our statistical mod- els are Reddit-specific, our statistical models can be generalized to other social media platforms, especially to those that possess sim- ilar attributes implicitly or explicitly (e.g., link karma on Reddit vs. number of retweets on Twitter as a manifestation of a user’s reputation on the online platform).
#### Limitations and Future Directions
Our work is of course not free from limitations. We acknowl- edge that generalizations of our work might not be easily applied across large populations or on arbitrary addiction contexts. As we pointed out, SS and SD are specialized self-improvement commu- nities; most likely, individuals who choose to join them are already motivated to quit addiction. Moreover, since these are largely com- munities of abstainers, it is possible that individuals new to quit- ting may feel uncomfortable joining the communities or can feel uncomfortable to be participating. Further biases inherent to Red- dit exist as well—the average redditor is a 20-something male10, perhaps more “tech-savvy”, and therefore more likely to resort to online platforms to obtain abstinence support compared to the gen-eral population. Additionally, since we did not have information on whether the long-term abstainers sought support through offline means, we are limited in the way we evaluate the effectiveness of the particular forums for addiction recovery. We also note that we focused on smoking and drinking addiction recovery, obviously ex- tending our findings to other kinds of addiction (e.g., prescription or recreational drugs) would need additional investigation.
As we also pointed out earlier, an important point to note about this work is that we do not predict abstinence of individuals in SS/SD. That is, based on our findings, we are not able to make (causal) claims as to whether someone will continue to abstain smoking or drinking in the future, or will relapse. This requires tracking an individual’s activity and their abstinence reports, i.e., the badge values, over time, which construes an important future research direction we intend to pursue. In fact, in prior literature on clinical studies of addiction behavior, use of survival analysis meth- ods have been found to be particularly helpful in forecasting the likelihood of experiencing a relapse. We intend to leverage these statistical approaches in the future to predict smoking or drinking relapse based on social media activities.
We also note that a known concern with many recovery com- munities is member retention—failure to recover often demotivates individuals and leads them to leave the platform. While it is chal- lenging to measure the overall retention rate for SS and SD based on our data, the focus on both self-reported abstinence information through badges and the users who had a recent post or comment in SS/SD ensures that we consider a population of individuals who are attempting to abstain from smoking/drinking and continuing to use Reddit. Also, as mentioned earlier, in our ground truth dataset, we had nearly 50% users who are short-term abstainers. However, per our current data, we cannot be sure of the nature of such short- term abstinence—i.e., whether individuals were attempting to quit smoking/drinking for the first time, or it followed a recent relapse experience. This is because Reddit’s API allows our program to access only the current badge of a user. Hence, we were not able to determine the nature of short-term abstinence of users in our dataset. For instance, we do not know if they had relapsed shortly before, or if they are attempting to quit for the first time. Finally, as Reddit also imposes that only the most recent thousand posts and comments of every user may be retrieved, we were limited in how far back we could go to examine redditors’ historical activity.
### CONCLUSION
We presented a computational framework to understand smok- ing and drinking abstinence of individuals from social media. We compiled and studied a previously unexplored source of data— activity on the Reddit communities StopSmoking and StopDrink- ing. We leveraged the badge feature in these forums to construct self-reported ground truth information on the abstinence status of users to characterize long-term abstinence. Our statistical mod- els incorporated a variety of language and interaction attributes to distinguish long-term abstinence from smoking or drinking from short-term abstinence with 85% accuracy. We found that linguis-tic cues like affect, activity cues like tenure, and network features like indegree to be indicative of short-term or long-term abstinence. Through our findings, we provided insights into how social media may be leveraged to tackle addiction-related health challenges.




https://www.cc.gatech.edu/~dchau/papers/15-ht-relapse.pdf

